---
title: Sri Lanka
slug: sri-lanka
date: '2020-01-19T13:49'
location: My desk in Stockholm
excerpt: Large and small observations from my trip to coastal and inland Sri Lanka.
keywords:
  - sri lanka
  - travels
  - asia
draft: true
---

**Before this trip, I had never been to Asia before.** During my early twenties, I didn't go backpacking in the Philippines, Bali, or other southeast Asian contries, as some people did in that age. I don’t know exactly why I haven’t. However, looking back, I'm not sure I "missed out": there's just been a delayed appreciation and understanding of Asia. It's blunt to say "Asia" here though, since it's a myriad of nations, cultures, languages, and traditions. Sorry about that. But I use it to differentiate it from the Western culture I'm brought up in, and the norms I'm used to.

So me and my girlfriend decided to go to Sri Lanka during three weeks in early January. After spending the Christmas with respective families in Sweden, we board a plan in Stockholm and arrive on New Year's Eve in Colombo.

## Arrival

The first thing hitting me is the humid heat. It's the same heat as in South America: it's everywhere around me. We go in a car from the airport directly down towards the south coast and I watch the dense jungle that surrounds the highway. There are houses too, even though they are more in the class of "cabins" or "shacks", many of them half finished and mere shells. It's slowly becoming pitch dark outside, and some rain arrives. I'm hot as hell, and it's very humid. Mixed with the tiredness from the flight, the humidity is annoying – I feel worn out and unclean – but there's of course nothing to do about it. We stay by the road to withdraw some cash and to get some light food.

We arrive in the village [Ahangama](https://goo.gl/maps/usBFRzecMpRCKpESA) after a three hour drive. Originally a small fishing village, it has seen some expansion from tourism, but not at all at large scale (yet). All commercial buildings lie on both sides of the Matara Road which goes along the whole south west coast. This is moment where I'm hit with the "Asia experience" for the first time: it's busy, noisy, slow, hectic. Tuk-tuks are everywhere, like small bees. People hang out on the curb and in shops. Girlfriend notes that this is "very lightweight" compared to larger towns and cities.

Our housing in Ahangama, where we'll stay for seven days, is basic but enough. It's a simple hostel with 3-4 rooms, run by a Barcelona woman in her thirties. She just recently started the place, and she's full of energy and has a warm but clean interior design taste.

We spend New Year's Eve on a bar called "Follow the White Rabbit" (the name is probably inspired by the plot in _"The Matrix"_ movie). This is my first evening out in this country. Everything is very cheap compared to Sweden and the Swedish currency. I almost feel ashamed of how cheap I think the food and drinks are. This will become a recurring thing while I'm here: the embarrassment over how little we pay for services, housing and food. It's a different world with a different system. I think of all the years of colonial rule (Portuguese, Dutch, British all were in Sri Lanka), where the west sucked out what they could in terms of natural resources, while the locals were left in a poor state. It's apparently not as bad as in India (not to speak of Africa...), and I don't see many people on the streets, publically begging for money. But I haven't researched that subject enough to explore it further here.

## Getting into the rhythm

The following days are mainly spent on various beaches around Ahangama. Tuk-tuk is the main means of transportation: it's a small three wheeled moped which does around 50 km/h. I think "This could totally work in Stockholm too, but running them on electricity instead of a gas engine". They're very convenient – there's always some tuk-tuk around to hail – and again very cheap. Like most urban Swedes, I'm a big fan of public transit. I love to get around on buses and subways. The public buses of Sri Lanka are a bit intimidating: with their huge wheels, they roar when they move through the traffic without mercy, vomiting out black exhaust gas. They slow down for a moment when people are getting on and off, which is done by literally jumping even though the bus hasn't stopped moving. We put the "Try The Bus" project on ice a while, until we know the society and surroundings better.

I have a hard time picking up _anything_ from the official languages spoken in Sri Lanka: Sinhalese and Tamil, with Sinhalese being the main one used on the south coast (all signs are in both languages). It's just very different from the Germanic and Romance languages. With English being the _lingua franca_ on the island, we certainly don't have a hard time communicating; it's more a matter of me having an urge to show respect to the locals by speaking a bit of their language. Next time here, perhaps I can nail a decent _"thank you"_ in Sinhalese.

One thing I notice, and something girlfriend explains further, is the [sideways nod](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0RaBxH_MKQI) locals perform frequently. It's used for a bunch of things: for confirmation, positive feedback, as a greeting. Another, related, thing I notice: people give me a light, physical touch in everyday situations. It's just a light touch when greeting me or showing me to the table when at restaurants. I make a mental note that I should do this myself more often when at home in the cold (thermally and socially) Nordics.

### The beaches

We hang out on a small amount of beaches nearby: Kabbalana Beach, Weligama Beach, and a small, anonymous beach 15 minutes walk east of our housing. Of all the beaches I've been at in the world, the Sri Lankan ones give me the most inner peace.

**Features of Sri Lankan beaches:**

- Different variants of sand types: from course to fine.
- Light food (roti, kottu, and more) and various drinks (fresh juices and smoothies, as well as water and beer).
- Sunbeds, which are so cheap you might as well get one.
- No people who walk around trying to sell you stuff.
- Not _too_ crowded, even in high season.
- Surfboard rentals, also so cheap you can rent one for a day and use it when you feel like it.

The sunsets are in a league of their own. Together with the California sunsets, the Sri Lankan ones are the most beautiful I've seen in the world. With the always present, dense, jungle as backdrop, the sun creates an ethereal light landscape which sparks feelings of peace within for me.

### The foods

On the beach, I fall in love with the dish _roti_, which is a pancake style shell with filling on the inside. Actually, it can contain basically anything, like chicken or vegetables, like the French _crêpe_. We order them with bananas and chocolate sauce. The fruits are so fresh and sweet and cheap here – not a news flash, but still worth reiterating.

I've always loved rice. When I was little back home, we often made lots of jasmine rice and topped it with Chinese soy sauce when eating. Here in Sri Lanka, fried rice become an instant hit for me. Mixed with a bunch of shredded vegetables and some protein (I often order with chicken or egg), and served with chili, it's the ultimate filler food.

There are a number of places tailored for Westeners, it seems. I have mixed feelings. I like the local food, but am interested in seeing various "fusions" or "modernisations" of traditional dishes by either local or foreign chefs. But I have no need whatsoever to find burgers, pizzas, or "Italian food" in Sri Lanka.

Some places we like:

- **The Kip** in Ahangama. Run by an Italian man and Australian woman. Their brunches, consisting of a bunch of small dishes (like tapas), are very nice. Great cappuccinos and other espresso based drinks (people tend to miss those on Sri Lanka). The location is very cool too: it feels like you're sitting right in the jungle. Recently, they started offering dinner as well (the tomato sauce is one of the best I've had).
- **The Lighthouse** in Ahangama. A bar on top of a "lighthouse". Great for aforementioned sunsets.
- **Chef Akila's Kitchen**, close to the Weligama bay. This unassuming place is very local, which is nice, and sits on a prime location for great sunsets too. The flavours in the rice and curry dish are outstanding – we can't find a rival to this chef during our three weeks here.
- **Follow the White Rabbit** in Ahangama. Mentioned earlier. On the beach (again, great sunsets) with cocktails, beer, and tapas style dishes.
- **Ceylon Sliders** in Weligama. Run by Swedish people. Very cool roof seating.
- **Hangtime Hostel** in Weligama. Right over the road from the beach. Large seating area on 3rd or 4th floor, which makes for a nice view of the bay.

One common thing of all the places we go to is that it takes a _long_ time to get the food. Even when it's not rush hour and it's a seemingly simple dish. I never really figure out why – it's just slow – but I don't care too much: we are seldom in a hurry. We learn to arrive earlier than planned in order to not starve.

---

It always takes a few days to get settled into a new location. Asia is still completely new to me, but south Sri Lanka proves to be a very friendly and welcoming area. After getting used to the heat and humidity, I feel very good here. If I'd had a scooter (and dared to use it on the roads) I'd feel even more free; not being dependant on the tuk-tuks to get around.

## The Next Level

After about a week in our first housing, we switch to a villa for two nights 10 minutes up in the jungle. The following days will be like visiting an oasis. We enter through the gates, and the initial view is breathing _calm_. The palm trees, the pool, the pavilion, the sunbeds – everything is sending such good energy it feels like nothing else exists.

We're greeted by a tall man with grey-white trimmed beard and hair (clearly in his "Clooney years"). The man – the owner – is Danish and has been visiting Sri Lanka for about 40 years, and now lives here. He's one of those people who possesses the, quite unique, old skill of driving a _conversation_. It's like an event in itself. To me, it's not so much about the choice of words or the tone of voice: more the balance between talking about oneself and the other party and seamlessly switching between the two in a fluid manner. Also the ability to combine shorter statements with longer sentences to form a coherent story which is eloquently ended with a grand finale.

We wander off more inland one day, into the residential areas in the jungle. Another side of the country appears. Low villas and bungalows mixed with Buddhist temples and shrines, and then the green paddy fields (for growing rice) which appears out of nowhere. If I squint, the shapes of the landscape is actually identical to the fields and forests from where I grew up, in rural Sweden. Quite surreal. The silence is similar to the farm back home.

After a while, the scenery becomes like a painting: the green fields against a jungle backdrop, with a cow or two grazing, and a tuk-tuk far away finding it's way forward like an ant over rough terrain. Compared with the intense and busy feel of the area around the main road, this mood feels like something that's backstage. A place of peace and rest, away from the frontlines of the ocean.

We buy some biscuits and a soda from a small kiosk on the road side. Cash is king in Sri Lanka. Coming from an almost cashless society, the phenomenon around carrying money around is a bit foreign. The biggest issue is around getting rid of the big bills – they have no value when dealing with small purchases with regular shop owners. If you withdraw mid-sized sums from ATMs, you'll get it in 5 000 rupee bills and downward. The guilt is real when you have no other option but to pay with a big bill.
