---
date: 2022-02-08 08:50:00
location: On the floor in my apartment in Stockholm
---

i'm switching to sublime text from vs code as main code editor, and man – it's much more config to
do before it's usable to me. vs code follows more of a "batteries included" and "sensible defaults"
approach.

this is my behavioural config (typography stuff removed):

```json
{
    "create_window_at_startup": false,
    "draw_indent_guides": true,
    "enable_tab_scrolling": false,
    "ensure_newline_at_eof_on_save": true,
    "highlight_modified_tabs": true,
    "highlight_line": true,
    "remember_open_files": false,
    "translate_tabs_to_spaces": true,
    "shift_tab_unindent": true,
    "hide_new_tab_button": true,
    "caret_style": "blink",
    "caret_extra_top": 1,
    "caret_extra_bottom": 1,
    "trim_trailing_white_space_on_save": "all",
    "scroll_past_end": true,
    "mini_diff": "auto",
    "folder_exclude_patterns": [
        ".svn",
        ".git",
        ".hg",
        "CVS",
        ".Trash",
        ".Trash-*",
        "node_modules",
        "build"
    ]
}
```

the last one is especially interesting. as of january 2022, there's **still no way to tell sublime
to ignore files in `.gitignore`**. sublime should hide/gray out the files/folders in the sidebar,
and _not_ make them appear in the quick open dialog. so i have to add folders such as `node_modules`
and `build` to the global config. people tell me to use some plugin (`sublime-gitignorer`), but
meh... [this issue](https://github.com/sublimehq/sublime_text/issues/2787) from 2019 is still open.

then i couldn't get the `editorconfig` plugin to work. i tried changing `indent_size` in my
`.editorconfig` file, but the change wasn't reflected in the editor. joy.

then i realised that the typescript in sublime 4 isn't really "support": it's more "the syntax
highlighting" is working. one has to install a typescript package for the Language Server Plugin for
intellisense (completions, etc) to work.
[people don't like this](https://forum.sublimetext.com/t/typescript-is-not-there-yet-to-be-called-supported/58768).

then i installed prettier along with the sublime plugin, but formatting on every save isn't viable
since it's _very_ slow. somebody online said that vs code's prettier extension is keeping long
running node processes instead of spawning a single one for each save. sublime's plugin is evidently
not doing that. may have to check out [dprint](https://github.com/dprint/dprint-sublime), but that
plugin isn't even out in package control yet. hehe.

then there are these small annoyances like i can't do `backspace` to delete a file when it's focused
in the sidebar. or hit `enter` to rename it. but no can do. like, what?! this is standard file
explorer shortcuts? i timeboxed 5 min to find a keybinding but couldn't. i guess my mental model
from atom and vs code differs from sublime's.

i'd really like more visual cues in the sidebar file tree about modified or added files, like vs
codes does. makes it a lot easier to navigate.

---

so is switching worth it? sublime is _so_ much faster than the electron based editors it's
ridiculous. when i'm comparing opening this repo's folder with `code .` and `subl .` from the
command line, i understand how gaslighted i've been with the electron editors. sublime just flashes
and it's open while vs code is busy booting another chromium app or whatever it's doing.

but i dislike having to carry around a set of plugins and settings when i switch computers. vs code
has this nice settings sync feature built in, but i'm 100% sure i need to sort that out myself for
sublime with some esoretic github gist based thing…

maybe [Jetbrains Fleet](https://www.jetbrains.com/fleet/) will be The One editor: native, without
bloat, and configurable?

if anybody uses any life saving plugins for sublime, please [give me a shout](/contact).
