---
date: 2022-10-27 20:24:17
location: Stockholm
---

hi again.

last week, i was in portugal 🇵🇹 (right on the coast) with the rest of lookback. it was lovely to see
everybody again. the heart is truly filled until next time.

we're going to south africa 🇿🇦 in november! we're gonna be in franschhoek and kalk bay, on the cape.
really looking forward, since a) i've never been in south africa, b) after researching, everything
seem so cool.

for the month long trip, i've made a list of books to read:

- _The Spy Who Came In From The Cold_, by John le Carré
- _Grand Union_, by Zadie Smith
- _Vargarna Från Evighetens Skog_, by Karl Ove Knausgård
- _At the Existentialist Café: Freedom, Being, and Apricot Cocktails_, by Sarah Bakewell
- _What We Owe the Future_, by William MacAskill.

just the action of making this list makes me excited.

red hot chili peppers' latest album
["return to the dream canteen"](https://open.spotify.com/album/0KJc9ksnoJJsdpQxV3z5i1?si=n5gq6c42Tpm54YKkAY9DlA)
is so good. i love anthony's smooth vocals, and john's solid guitar. they're so very musical.

i've bought an watch even though i've said i wouldn't. to my defense, it was a) a used one, and b)
i'll only use it for exercising. it's really nice to not bring the phone when running, since i wanna
track how good i do. however, i'm really impressed by the watch so far. it's really a marvel of
engineering.

i watch "house of the dragon" on HBO, and "rings of power" on amazon prime. the former is really
good: even though it doesn't have the intricate storylines from "game of thrones", i like the acting
and focus on relationships between parents and children. i also appreciate the focus on the
hardships for women of giving birth. "rings of power" is so-so. it feels too CGI, i think, and too
"joyful". it doesn't have the raw feeling of peter jackson's trilogy.
