---
date: 2023-11-29 20:10:49
location: My couch in Stockholm
tags:
    - dev
    - javascript
---

Messing around with the styling and structure here on the website again. I'm so inspired by all the
personal sites I stumble on in my feed. But not inspired enough to actually produce as much content
here as I would love to 😄

Been reading a lot about
[Web Components](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_components) recently. They're
having a sort of renaissance at the moment — not sure why this timing actually — much thanks to them
being a tool in the box when building with progressive enhancement. All PE thought leaders are going
on about the beauty of Web Components and "how you don't need any big JS or Virtual DOM libraries at
all!!". I get that for small, self-contained UI components, but for anything non-trivial, you're
kind of bound to reinvent something inhouse for your app anyway, no? I guess Web Components fill the
hole where you just want to drop a custom element in a piece of markup and have a Web Component use
the element with contained JS and perhaps CSS.

But the idea of "HTML Web Components" is really neat, in the way it enhances existing markup. Like
this:

```html
<convert-currency to="USD">10</convert-currency>
<script src="convert-currency.js" type="module"></script>
```

```js
// convert-currency.js
customElements.define(
    'convert-currency',
    class extends HTMLElement {
        connectedCallback() {
            // use this.querySelector() and other DOM API methods to convert
            // the text content to the currency from this.getAttribute("to").
        }
    },
);
```

- For server rendered markup, `<convert-currency>` will render just fine, and `10` with it. Browsers
  will just ignore it when parsing the HTML.
- When parsing is done and JS kicks in, we'll "enrich" our custom element with logic.

My takeaway is that custom elements and Web Components give us a declarative way to encapsulate
logic (duh, "components" it's in the name), which creates whole new patterns in how to approach
component style architecture but _without_ any 3rd party JS component library.
