---
date: '2024-10-10T13:05:32+02:00'
location: Cape Town, South Africa
timezone: Africa/Johannesburg
---

I'm not a huge fan of having _too many_ custom config, like aliases in your shell or git prompt. But I'm gonna share a few git aliases which I use rougly 1 402 times a day.

## Scenario: continue with the latest WIP commit

When switching between branches, one can `git stash` and try to remember that when coming back to the branch. I often don't. Therefore I often do `git commit -a -m "wip"` with the current state and move on, since committed data is _really_ hard to get rid of (`git reflog` is amazing).

So. I'm back on a branch with a `f8f10d195 Johan Brook wip` commit sitting in there. I want to continue with it, so I do:

```shell
git u
```

Files are now unstaged and the worktree is as it was before committing.

The `.gitconfig`:

```gitconfig
 [alias]
    unstage = reset HEAD
    # "Remove" the last commit and unstage everything
    u = !git reset --soft @~1 && git unstage .
```

(I use `git unstage .` too, that's why it's a separate alias.)

## Scenario: interactive rebase in the current branch

I use `git rebase -i` a lot to squash commits together before a code review or similar. Instead of manually finding the range of commits to rebase, I use this alias:

```gitconfig
 [alias]
    # Interactive rebase for all commits in the current branch (compare against main branch)
    rb = !git rebase -i `git merge-base main HEAD`
    # Same as above but autosquash
    rba = !git rebase -i --autosquash `git merge-base main HEAD`
```

Like this, while being on a non-`main` branch:

```shell
git rb
```

And then your `$EDITOR` opens with the interactive rebase. Fun!

***

For the `rba` alias, I use the "autosquash" feature like this:

1. Do commit A.
2. After review, do commit B which should go into A.
   **Tip:** Use `git commit --fixup=HEAD` ([docs](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit/2.32.0#Documentation/git-commit.txt---fixupamendrewordltcommitgt)).
3. `git rba`
4. Save in `$EDITOR`, close.
5. Done! Now commit B was squashed into commit A while keeping the latter's commit message.

No tedious manual steps with finding commit hashes and so on. The `--autosquash` option in the rebase works automatically with `git commit --fixup` (there are other options as well, such as `--squash`).

### Update, October 11th 2024: `git-absorb`

I saw on Mastodon that this tool exists: [`git-absorb`](https://github.com/tummychow/git-absorb).

It basically automates step 2 above. I simplified this a bit in my example: in reality, you might do _N_ number of fixup commits there. `git-absorb` divides the staged content in hunks and intelligently finds the first ancestor commit which touches on the same code, and creates these fixup commits for you.

I will give it a try!

## Scenario: when you just want to start over

```gitconfig
 [alias]
    fuckit = reset --hard HEAD
```
