---
date: 2024-01-18 20:44:58 +7
timezone: Asia/Bangkok
location: Koh Lanta, Thailand
tags:
    - travels
    - thailand
---

We arrived to Koh Lanta a few days ago, where we'll spend the next two months. While I like long
stays in locations, it doesn't come without risk. Especially when bringing kids. "Will we like it?
Will it be boring? Will there be too many tourists? Will we be able to create an everyday life?" are
questions which I've had during the days up until arriving. I think this kind of travelling is one
part experience and one part "Just Do It". For experience: you just have to trust your gut
instincts, and also your skills and ability to integrate well and have a good time. The "Just Do It"
part is self-explanational.

Koh Lanta is super so far though. We live just by Klong Dao beach, which is a super relaxed and cool
beach: restaurants, bars, and cafés on one side, and looooong waves on the other. And yes: there
_are_ a ton of tourists (we among them!) — mostly Scandinavian — but I've accepted that now (haha).

A few days in, we've found some kind of a rhythm:

1. Early morning, I either sleep in and hang out with the kids, or do exercise (running or gym).
2. Late morning, either me or my wife gets "off time". The other one goes swimming with the kids.
3. At lunch, the baby sleeps and the older one hangs out inside for some calm time near the A/C. One
   of us parents can go outside.
4. After lunch, we do some activity. For now that list still only consists of… more swimming 😅
5. Late afternoon, it has gotten less hot outside, and we can hang out on the beach just by the
   shallow water where the kids can play and we can bring takeaway thai food, while watching the
   beginning of the sunset.

What I love so far with Koh Lanta:

1. The ease of living. Many things just exist at your doorstep. A decent supermarket, phone stores
   for prepaid SIM cards, cafés, cheap thai food joints, pad thai stands, drug stores. Products of
   years of mass tourism!
2. The picturesque beach. I have to pinch myself every morning.
3. The pleasant locals. Not _everybody_ are super happy and friendly (I reckon also a product of
   years of mass tourism!), but everybody _are_ helpful and solutions oriented. They love babies so
   much, by the way. Everybody are smiling and acknowledging our 10 month old baby, who beams back
   at them. If I would do that back home in Stockholm… I… I don't know what would happen.

For me, I _love_ the heat that comes with tropical weather. It makes me a tad slower, but overall I
prefer to be surrounded by warm 30°C air versus mere 20°C air (which we get in Sweden on averege in
the summers, it feels like). A/Cs help a lot, sure. But even without them, I'd just _exist_ in the
heat (and swim a lot).
