---
date: '2024-08-10T08:36:00+02:00'
timezone: Europe/Stockholm
tags:
    - recently
---
A batch of stuff I've done and consumed recently.

During the Swedish Summer, we've enjoyed hanging out in the Stockholm archipelago and elsewhere. We spontanously went down to the west coast and near Denmark for the tail end — areas I love.

The main theme of our late Spring and Summer has been to prepare for the move to Cape Town, South Africa. During the a single week, we finally found tenants for our apartment in Stockholm, an apartment in Cape Town, as well as being able to book the flights. Felt good! Now only some regular admin is left (insurances, pack things in our apartment, etc). And of course saying goodbyes to friends and family.

…and, I'm starting working again on Monday, after almost six months of parental leave. Feels a bit weird, but it'll be so good to code and chat with colleagues again.

# Watched

- **Gangs of New York** (movie) ★★☆☆☆

  I rewatched this and man, it hasn't aged well 😓 It doesn't feel like a Scorsese movie at all. The camera, lighting,
  dialogue, fighting scenes — everything feels amateurish. Daniel Day-Lewis is the only light in the dark.

- **Let It Be** (movie, Disney+) ★★★★☆

  The re-release of the Beatles film from 1970. I had seen much of it in Peter Jackon's *Get Back* documentary, but
  this was a nice condensed version. I love Paul's style in clothes.
  
- **3 Body Problem** (series, Netflix) ★★★★☆

  One of the best sci-fi series I've seen. Although there were clichés and cheesy moments, I thoroughly enjoyed the deeper questions arising around humanity, science, and space.
  
  <details>
    <summary class="muted">Spoilers</summary>
    
    It was such a cool angle to have the aliens arrive in 400 years, and in the meantime, having them ruin our science until their arrival. How do we deal with an incoming threat when it's so far away? I like these deeper questions around space, humanity, and aliens.
    
  </details>
  
- **The Dropout** (series, Max) ★★★★☆

  Very chilling and dark story about Elizabeth Holmes and the whole Theranos fail. It was really well made, and I'm happy they included a lot of small things from Silicon Valley/tech culture (sleeping in the office, VCs being assholes, the focus on offices, things, and marketing instead of actually creating any value for humans).

- **House of the Dragon** (series, Max) ★★★★★

  I'm not sure what reviews or people say about this spin-off series, but I love it.
  
# Reading

- [_Historien om New York_ by Henrik Berggren](/reading/historien-om-new-york)
- [_Just nu är jag här_ by Isabelle Ståhl](/reading/just-nu-ar-jag-har)
- [_Eden_ by Isabelle Ståhl](/reading/eden)
- [_Short Fiction_ by Ernest Hemingway](/reading/short-fiction)
- [_Kitchen Confidential_ by Anthony Bourdain](/reading/kitchen-confidential)
- [_The Talented Mr. Ripley_ by Patricia Highsmith](/reading/the-talented-mr.-ripley)
- [Bring your own base class](https://hawkticehurst.com/writing/bring-your-own-base-class/)

# Listened

- [_We Will Always Love You_ by The Avalanches (2020)](https://open.spotify.com/album/755yBlrk0Sz8tIgMMTgyr1?si=_HKhHSH1S-OEoeA_yZ1neQ)

  This album is insanely good. Been rediscovering it the past week (haven't been listening to it since it came out in 2020).
  
- [My reggae playlist](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/6sQMuWwPINJiLZUJK4Z3uD?si=2441f460f76444a0)

  My classic reggae/dub/rocksteady playlist has gone warm during the summer.

- [Bowiepodden](https://open.spotify.com/show/5v0aBiDE0r0hvfeM2qPR6Y?si=8e38445bc72b4936) (in Swedish, "The Bowie Podcast")

  I'm haven't ever been a podcast kinda guy, but this one hit me just right: the host and his invited guests go through a David Bowie album per episode, talking about each one of the tracks. Super nerdy, but there's a great warmth and appreciation for Bowie's artistery and his collaborations with the fellow musicians on the tracks.

# Cooked

- [Carnitas](https://stellanspice.com/traditional-carnitas/) for [Tortas ahogadas](https://stellanspice.com/tortas-ahogadas/).
