---
date: '2024-09-26T12:08:05+02:00'
location: Cape Town, South Africa
timezone: Africa/Johannesburg
fediUrl: 'https://hachyderm.io/@brookie/113203450341962045'
---

Me and the fam have arrived to Cape Town, which will be our home for six months. During the week, we've sorted out SIM cards, a car rental, groceries, and made ourselves aquainted with the surroundings.

We're in Bantry Bay, in the southern end of Sea Point. It's one of the best locations I've lived in (up there when I lived two blocks from Copacabana in Rio 2016). It's a 5 min walk to shops and restaurants, 3 min to the ocean, and a short jog to the Clifton beaches (where the uber-rich live).

First impressions:

-   The Swedish thing of _strandskydd_ (lit. _beach protection_) where you can't erect buildings within 75-100 meters to the water line does **not** exist here 😄 There are luxury villas literally on the beach.
-   The whole Sea Point promenade has various apartment and hotel buildings facing the ocean, so there's _no_ real restaurant, bar, or café game along the promenade. Too bad. If I would've planned that strip, I would've encouraged businesses to open for drinks and food all over the Atlantic seaboard.
-   They haven't really prioritised parks or play areas for kids. The Green Point park is cool, but quite far away from us. Feels like they've been wanting to maximise every inch of land here in order to sell houses, and not "waste" it on kids.
-   Sidewalks in our area are not super walkable with a stroller. The hills are steep!

On the lighter notes:

-   Coming from a pretty homogenic area in Sweden, the diversity here is amazing. It's such a mix of people, languages, and cultures. I realise once again why I love travelling and why we as a family are doing this in the first place.
-   Wine, coffee, and beer is so cheap compared to Stockholm.
-   Living by the ocean is something we've prioritised, and consider a rare luxury. Our apartment is "humble", so to speak, but the lower monthly rate made it possible for us to afford hiring a nanny as well as having a long term rental car.
-   Speaking about cars: even though Uber is very affordable, I think if you're here for over a month, you'd like to have your own car. Being able to drive out to the wine country and go around the farms is a nice day trip (don't drink and drive though).
