---
date: '2024-05-16T11:22:00+02:00'
location: Stockholm, Sweden
timezone: Europe/Stockholm
skip_mastodon: true
stars: ★☆
tags:
    - recently
---

## Watched

- **Poor Things** (movie, Disney+) ★★★★★

   Very weird, very great. Superb acting by Emma Stone.

- **Verldens Verste Menske** (movie, Disney+) ★★★★★

   Also very good acting by the main character, played by Renate Reinsve. A nice "anti romantic" (?) movie about
   not conforming. Come for the promise of good director (Joachim Trier), stay for the dreamy summery Oslo scenes.

- **Baby Raindeer** (mini-series, Netflix) ★★★★☆

   Everybody has been talking about this one. I found it good. Super brave by the main actor, who wrote and created
   the series based on his own experiences with stalking and sexual abuse. The storyline surely made me binge it.
   I appreciated how it was nuanced in the way that it made the stalker human, and didn't hide the victim's part.

- **Ripley** (mini-series, Netflix) ★★★★★

   Oh my god, the black and white cinematography, the clothing, the slow scenes! Harrowing remake of the novel
   _The Talented Mr. Ripley_. I appreciate the slow pace, and Andrew Scott is _perfectly_ cast as Tom Ripley. More so
   I think than the boyish Matt Damon in the 1999 film. Scott has those "great white shark" eyes, where he can
   completely turn off any emotions and you just see an empty abyss.

## Books

- [_Nattens Skole_ by Karl Ove Knausgård](/reading/nattens-skole)
- [_Oktoberbarn_ by Linda Boström Knausgård](/reading/oktoberbarn)
- [_Historien om New York_ by Henrik Berggren](/reading/historien-om-new-york)

## Articles

- [_React, Electron, and LLMs have a common purpose: the labour arbitrage theory of dev tool popularity_](https://www.baldurbjarnason.com/2024/react-electron-llms-labour-arbitrage/)

## Cooked

- [Slow cooked vegetarian ragú](/recipes/vegetarian-ragu)
