---
date: '2025-01-22T20:21:57+02:00'
location: Cape Town, South Africa
timezone: Africa/Johannesburg
title: The Framework laptop
tags:
    - hardware
    - linux
    - mac
---

I don't need a new computer right now, but if I did, I'd be very keen on a [Framework](https://frame.work) laptop.

I first read about this company a few years ago, and are following some people who are posting about updates on the project. [Here's a good thread](https://elk.zone/mastodon.social/@sitnik_en/113872650521584596) by Andrey Sitnik, for instance. And [here's a blog post](https://wil.to/switching-to-a-framework-and-ubuntu/) by Wil Shipley about his first few months running Linux on Framework 16.

## Why

What attracts me, in order of priority:

1. The modularity: the ability to upgrade parts if they break or go old.
2. The need to stick it to the man and support a small company.
3. The technical challenge of running Linux for the first time.
4. The 3:2 120Hz screen.
5. Maybe not pay so goddamned much for a computer.

I have no problems with MacBooks are hardware devices per se. The Apple Silicon generations of CPUs are wonderful, and the build quality is of course the best in the world. But is it worth the price of a small car to have such laptop for personal use? Sure, I could get away with a MacBook Air, and it would last a long time. My current personal laptop is a MacBook Pro 13" from 2013. I don't use it much, but it still runs quite well. As long as you put a lot of RAM in them from the start, a MacBook Pro could totally run for 5+ years (maybe also with a battery replacement).

But as you all know, I'd continue to be Apple's lil' bitch. If the logic board fails? Sorry bro, you need to replace the whole chassi. But they suck you in! With their superior aluminium and amazing battery time. With their tight iOS integrations and Just Works™ guarantees. I guess that's the question for me: do I want something that just works for a premium cost, or am I prepared for tinker a bit for something that's more aligned with my beliefs?

## The threats

This would be the first time since 2007 that I would not be using a Mac as the daily driver. It would be a bit scary to do The Switch to Linux and another hardware. I know the Framework laptop _will feel_ worse in build quality than a MacBook. Even though owners say the latest Framework models "are so good", I just know they can't match Apple.

Software wise, I don't care much. I depend on very few apps in macOS. I basically just need a code editor, web browser, a terminal, a password manager, Signal, and Spotify. All of these are easily installable or replacable on Linux.

What's a bit disconcerting though is the need for Fixing Things On Linux. Like, rando things breaking in kernel updates, or hunting around forums for this one fix. This is what I do in my day job (web development, am I right), so I wouldn't love to mess around with that for my personal setup too. But who knows?

They say Linux on the Framework is solid these days: Ubuntu and Fedora are even first class citizens. I did some research, because what if I _don't_ want those distros? [Linux Mint](https://linuxmint.com) is apparently cool if you wanna get rid of Ubuntu's bloat, for instance. The Framework forums and Reddit offered a ton of advice, and a lot of words of warning. <abbr title="Your Mileage May Vary">YMMV</abbr>.

---

We'll see where I land, but what's interesting is that I so much enjoy _reading_ about the Framework laptop in various ways! It's actually a nerdy joy to scan Reddit threads about various experiences. The Tinkering side of me has awakened again: I probably haven't been thinking about hardware parts and OS settings since my LAN days on Windows in the early 2000s. It's quite refreshing actually, as Andrey mentioned in the thread linked above, to be _owning_ your hardware for real again. To put it together yourself. To use your hands and have the tactile element to it in a world which is eaten by software.
