---
date: '2025-04-17T09:09:00+02:00'
location: 'Stockholm, Sweden'
timezone: Europe/Stockholm
tags:
  - recently
fediUrl: 'https://hachyderm.io/@brookie/114352201195946365'
---
## Seen and done

We came back to Sweden from Cape Town in mid March. The "change management" with the kids went well, but it's mentally quite hard to be back in a different climate and another way of life. I *really* loved our lifestyle in South Africa, and can't wait to go back somehow. It's just feels weird to be back in Sweden: everything is as it's always been, and apart from friends and family, I feel no real connection to being here.

Our youngest daughter is now 2 years old and has begun preschool. She's enjoying it, and it's so cute how she strolls away to her friends when I'm leaving here in the mornings.

## Travelling

I've got a trip to New York lined up in June with friends. Really looking forward to it. We'll see what our Summer brings, but I reckon we'll hang out in Sweden and do spontaneous things, instead of planning everything in advance. Gotta save that cash for next South Africa trip!

## Hobbies

I've been reading a lot about Linux recently. I've been using the Mac since 2007, and had this long period where I just wanted computers "to work". I had my PC tweaking age in my teens, where I was into customisation and all that. Now when I'm constantly underwhelmed with macOS and big tech corps in general, switching to Linux for my personal stuff feels like a breath of fresh air. This feeling of not being Apple's little bitch all the time. To be honest, I'm just using a code editor, a terminal, and a web browser anyway for most personal things.

So I've started to follow some Linux accounts on Mastodon and I've read all articles I can find on Linux news. We'll see when I buy a new laptop. But I'm just looking forward to be a newbie again, and *tinker* with the computer.

## Watched

- **The Bear S03** (series, Disney+) ★★★★☆

  Still super good, but not *as good* as the first season.

- **Black Doves** (series, Netflix) ★★★☆☆

  A bit of Bond, a bit of any spy thriller. There were some refreshing takes on the genre, but not super original in the grand sense of things.
  
- **The Helicopter Heist** (series, Netflix) ★★★★☆

  I loved this. Gritty, good camera, "okay" dialogue. The scene with the actual heist is one of the best action/heist scenes I've seen.
  
- **Zoolander** (movie, Netflix)

  I'm not even going to rate this, because y'all know what it's about. This was a pure escapism and nostalgia trip.
  
- **Cien Años de Soledad** (series, Netflix) ★★★★☆

  It was supposedly really tricky to acquire the rights to make a series of [the famous book](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One_Hundred_Years_of_Solitude), and even trickier to shoot it. I read the children of the author, Gabriel García Márquez, were instrumental in the process. Also, the cast were 100% Colombian and many weren't actually professional actors. Authenticity!
  
  I've read fifty pages of the book, and that was "weird". The series has kept that "weirdness" and "magical realism" which made the book so unique and original. They both serve as history lessons, as we're following the Buendía family over what is (my thoughts) a industrialisation of society, and introduction of socialism and conservatism.
  
- **Trolösa** (series, SVT Play) ★★★★☆

  Story by Ingmar Bergman, directed by Tomas Alfresson. I loved the 1970s styling and interior design. The series has *such* great sense and attention to detail. The pacing is slow in the beginning, but things are moving quickly later. The big sadness is that they used a Danish actor for the role of old David, and they AI enhanced his voice to sound more Swedish. It sort of takes the whole vibe out of the different time periods.
  
- **Dune: Prophecy** (series, Max) ★★★☆☆

  Initially, I found this a lazy spin-off from the two great films by Denis Villeneuve. But it grew on me, and became quite an intimate and tragic portrait of the main character that is Valya Harkonnen.
  
- **Adolescence** (series, Netflix) ★★★★★

  The one everybody is talking about. It's just great. The "each episode is a single shot" fitted very well into the narrative, especially in the first episode. Such strong performances.

- **I’m Still Here** (film) ★★★★★

  The Brazilian film which one an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. It's about a family in 1970s Rio de Janeiro, during the military dictatorship. The performances almost didn't feel like acting, because they were so natural.

## Read

- [*A Season For That*](/reading/a-season-for-that/) by Steve Hoffman.
- [*The Mirror at Midnight*](/reading/mirror-at-midnight/) by Adam Hochschild.
- [*Rejection*](/reading/rejection/) by Tony Tulathimutte.
- [*Disgrace*](/reading/disgrace/) by J.M. Coetzee.
- [*Age Of Iron*](/reading/age-of-iron/) by J.M. Coetzee.
