---
date: '2025-09-30T14:00:01+02:00'
location: 'Stockholm'
timezone: Europe/Stockholm
description: What I've been up to recently, April-September 2025.
tags:
    - recently
---

## Seen and done

During Summer, we hung around in Stockholm area as well as on the west coast of Sweden. It was totally "lagom" (_appropriate level of travelling_).

Well before my birthday in July, I was surprised by a party arranged by my lovely wife. All my friends (new and old) where there. I was so touched. The party lasted until 04:00 in the morning.

At work, we've moved offices from the Old Town of Stockholm to Södermalm (hipster, rustic). So far I enjoy the vibe.

## Hobbies

I bought a used watchmaker kit on a market place site. I actually own quite a collection of random watches now, and I grew tired of having to go to the local watch store and pay them to change the battery in my quartz based watches. This kit is amazing: it includes 29 various tools for doing anything with a watch. I feel empowered! Able! It would be super cool to get into refurnishing old watches, but I wouldn't remotely know where to start if I'd get a mechanical one where the glass is broken or cogs are bad or missing.

## Travelling

Went to New York City in June with friends to see another friend. I lived there briefly in 2016, and man, it's such a cool city. I was almost hungover on all the impressions when going home. Really thankful for getting to make that trip with people I have super fun with.

And finally, we've booked another trip back to beloved Cape Town, South Africa. We're going to be there during early December to late January. During the second month, we'll be on the round going from

1. Cape Town up to Cederberg via Riebeek-Kasteel.
2. Then down towards the Klein Karoo on the R62, staying in Swellendam and Oudtshoorn.
3. We'll land for six nights near Plettenberg Bay, where we'll explore the surroundings on the Garden Route.
4. Further, we'll move for a short stay in Wilderness, at some camp.
5. The last leg is a long one back west, for some nights in the wine valley Hemel-en-Aarde (hello Pinot Noirs).
6. And finally back to Cape Town.

## Reading

- [_Careless People_](/reading/careless-people)
- [_Beyond the Wall_](/reading/beyond-the-wall)
- [_Stacken_](/reading/stacken)
- [_Intermezzo_](/reading/intermezzo)

## Watched

- **Charter** (film) ★★★★☆

    Heartbreaking and solid family drama.

- **The Northman** (film) ★★★★☆

    If it's one thing this film was, it's _super cool_. One might laugh at the sheer over-the-top graphics, violence, dialogue, and story. But I totally loved that they went over that top, since they got away with it: it never did feel tacky or badly done.

- **Reservatet** (series) ★★★★☆

    Danish quality television. Very unnerving. Very nice in showing off societal issues around class.

- **Severance S03** (series) ★★★★★

    Such a great show. The tense has slowly built up during the seasons, and the S03 finale was insanely nerve wracking. They've really created a bed for the viewers to _root_ for the main characters: this emotional bonding phenomenon.

- **Juror #2** (film) ★★★☆☆

    A classic court case movie by Clint Eastwood! Full of nostalgia for me, since it reminds me of the movies my parents used to watch in the late 90s and 00s. It's a great drama, and an epic dilemma.

- **Generationer** (series) ★★★★☆

    Another Danish show, equally well done. This one was _so_ messy though — it was all over the place. Not sure it was tied together in the end, but the acting was really great. And I think they had a message there somewhere.

- **Challengers** (film) ★★★★☆

    By Luca Guadagnino. I was entertained. Interesting although classic triangle drama centering on tennis. Made me want to play tennis.

- **The Rest Is History** (podcast) ★★★★★

    Two British guys are covering historical battles, events, and people from the Antiquity to 1900s. Their charm and dialogue with each other is so great. I'm not normally a podcast person, but I'm really looking forward to my commute each morning where I can dive back into Viking stories, our about how evil the Belgians were in Congo in the late 1800s. Their pacing is great, and the put emphasis on the important stuff (I think).

- **Halva Malmö Består av Killar Som Har Dumpat Mig** (series) ★★★★☆

    Relation drama about a woman in her early 30s who just can't find a boyfriend. The main character is played very well: she really has the quirky moves I remember having when meeting up with a date in the hallway for the first time. Very authentic, and towards the end, raw.

- **Inherent Vice** (film) ★★★★☆

    By Paul Thomas Anderson. I read some reviews beforehand, and it was really praised. But half-way in (with over 1,5 hours left!) I just had to pause for the night. It's a neo-noir drama set in L.A. (what could go wrong?!), but I kind of wasn't entertained by neither the story nor the dialogue. It wasn't full of memorable characters like the Cohen brothers' movies, or cool dialogue like Tarantino. But somehow, I got _attached_ to the story when continuing the day after, and maybe I had the lenght of the film to thank for that? Joaquin Phoenix did really well, and the costumes were great.
