---
date: '2026-01-28T21:11:26+01:00'
location: Stockholm
timezone: Europe/Stockholm
fediUrl: 'https://hachyderm.io/@brookie/115974819968313447'
---
Based on the initiative [Leave X](https://leavex.eu/politicians-se/), I wrote to all of the Swedish members of parliament still active on X, currently 230 people. Out of those, **9 people** replied within 24 hours.

Turns out that "active" is a keyword here which we'll return to below.

## Rickard Nordin (C)

Claims he's _inactive_, and hasn't deleted his account because he wants to follow sports on there in certain communities. Communities, he further claims, are _only present_ on X and he can't control that. Thus, he won't leave a super problematic site.

## Patrik Lundqvist (S)

Claims he's _inactive_, and totally shares my view that X is a bad platform. He hasn't replied when I suggested he'd delete his account.

## Katarina Luhr (MP)

Invites me to follow her on Bluesky, but is still on X — probably _inactive_ — in order to keep herself updated on what's going on there. Hasn't replied yet when I suggested she'd delete her account.

## Helena Vilhelmsson (C)

Totally agrees with me, and has even brought it up in some parliament working group. She has been _inactive_ for years, and sadly can't access the account in order to delete it. Asks me for advice. We do some back and forth with tech troubleshooting and she will try to reset the password via her phone number. Exciting.

## Martin Melin (L)

Claims he's been _inactive_ since 2018, and has tried to delete the account, but no access to the old email. I refrain from offering to troubleshoot since the vibe in the thread tells me he's not psyched to do that right now. He concludes that since he's not _active_ on X, that will show his stance in the matter. I refrain from linking to ["What does it mean to be “active” on X?"](https://leavex.eu/faq/#what-does-it-mean-to-be-active-on-x).

## Hanna Gunnarsson (V)

Totally agrees with me in theory ("so in theory, X is bad, but practically, it's good? Like heroin?", I think). She's still on X for practical reasons, and cross posts to Bluesky. She knows X and how it works, and has her followers. Works for her. "I know it's bad, but it's practical".

My reply includes a small novella about our her presence legimitises X and the people there, and recommend her to delete her account and commit to Bluesky.

## Alexander Christiansson (SD)

Claims he's a grown up and don't need pressure to switch platforms. "Okay".

P.S. This is a member of the right-wing, authoritarian, racist party Sweden Democrats.

## Martin Kinnunen (SD)

Just replies with a question of who's prompting these emails about leaving X. I reply that I don't find that super relevant.

P.S. Same racist party as above.

## Jan Ericson (M)

Totally understands my point, but at the same time thinks it's important that not only Russian trolls, Trump supporters, and islamists are the ones getting to post at X. He won't leave, as he has 46.000 followers to take care of. Wow. Did he really say that?

I reply that he surely would do greater impact by bringing those 46.000 followers to an alternative platform, and link to a post about precisely [the fallacy he's an example of](https://leavex.eu/posts/why-stay-on-social-media-makes-no-sense/).

---

## Summary

- All but one of the left/liberal/centrist party members claim they are _inactive_ but for reasons, they can't/won't delete their accounts. Only Hanna Gunnarsson from the Left Party is still active on X, and has the guts to tell me so.
- The one member from the conservative party will _not_ leave because he's still out there, fighting trolls, islamists, and Trump supporters. How valiant.
- Two members from the racist party became a bit upset over my email I think.

## Appendix: Party labels

- **C**: Centerpartiet. Centrist, allied with the Social Democrats.
- **S**: Socialdemokraterna. Social democrats. The usual suspects.
- **L**: Liberalerna. Liberals, allied with the conservative block.
- **MP**: Miljöpartiet. The green party. Allied with the social democrats.
- **V**: Vänsterpartiet. The leftmost party. Allied with the social democrats.
- **M**: Moderaterna. Conservatives.
- **SD**: Sverigedemokraterna. Right-wing, nationalistic, authoritarian, neo-conservative racists.
