---
date: '2026-02-19T08:00:38+01:00'
location: Stockholm
timezone: Europe/Stockholm
description: Where are all startups and fun iOS and Mac apps?
---

A quick post in two parts.

## Where are all the startups?

In the office yesterday, the subject of startups came up. More precisely, the lack of them in the Stockholm tech scenes these days. Where are they? Where did they go? (By "startup", I do not refer to the corporations that are Klarna and Spotify and the likes.)

_When I was young_ (2005-2016), there was a myriad of small startups all around. In the vibrant scene that is a technical university, the topic of joining or founding startups was ever present. It wasn't much of a question whether to join one or not, but more _"Which one?"_.

I'm not the person who has these smart analytical thoughts on the holistic health of the industry, but if I'd guess, it's down to that these days, there is:

- less venture capital available. Investors are more risk averse.
- we're not generally in good economic times. Young people and workers overall want financial stability and job security. Things typically not associated with startups.

But is it only The Economy? Stockholm (Sweden overall, really) is traditionally associated with innovation and our welfare state has made it possible to try out ventures without having to put your family on the street if that venture would fail. Maybe I'm old and completely disconnected from The Scene nowadays, but I seldom hear about innovative startups any longer, nor young people wanting to work for such business.

## Where are all the apps?

In my Mastodon feed yesterday, I saw a post about a new app: [Current](https://www.terrygodier.com/current). It's an RSS feed reader, built in an innovative. I recommend reading through the whole marketing site: it's a beautiful example of product design and indie app making.

These kinds of releases of apps for iOS or Mac _used to_ be a monthly phenomenon in the mid-late 2000s and early 2010s. There were "fun" apps, beautifully design apps and icons, there was a whole lifestyle of using apps from indie developers and being in awe of every new major release. People were _so good_ at designing user interfaces. What happened?!

I have no layman guess for this at all. Maybe we've moved away from the app industry and more into "services" (derogatory) and "subscriptions".

For myself, I'm not the change I want to see in the world either. Honestly, I have less and less energy to find and use new apps and tools these days. Maybe it's age, having kids, and having more IRL hobbies which lets me loiter around online considerably less. Maybe apps have become noise to me in an everyday life where my top priority is simplicity and _removing_ things that take my focus.

Still, my iPhone is totally less "fun" now compared to how it was in 2010.
